
Short language reference of New Stanford Pascal

This compiler implements the Pascal language as defined by
the Jensen/Wirth publication
"Pascal User Manual and Report"
of the 1970s -
but with many enhancements
and some differences. These enhancements are listed in this paper.

The language defined by Jensen/Wirth is called "Standard Pascal"
in this paper.


Program header

As with Standard Pascal, the program header may contain a list of
external file names. But the names of the external files are
optional. Every file which is declared in the main function is
external by default, no matter if it appears in the program header
or not. The allocation of external Pascal files to files known to
the operating system(s) is explained later.

Furthermore, there are six predefined external files, all of type TEXT:
INPUT, OUTPUT, PRR, QRR, PRD, QRD.

There is a second variant of program header, which starts with the
MODULE keyword (instead of PROGRAM). This second variant does not
contain a main program, but instead a collection of external procedures
and functions (see later). A module must not have a list of file names,
and the main routine must be empty in the module case (like this: BEGIN END).

A module must not have (global) variables, only procedures and functions.
But: a module can have global STATIC variables (see later). These static
variables can be initialized by constants (see later).

<Module example>


Constants

First of all, the "definition sections" CONST, TYPE, VAR etc.,
which must be in a certain order in Standard Pascal and which
may appear only once at a certain block level, may appear in ANY order
in New Stanford Pascal and may appear multiple times.

This is necessary, because we also have "typed" constants, that is:
constant definitions involving explicit types, and so the type definitions
in this case must precede the const definitions.

"Normal" consts look like in this example:

const TAB_MAX = 1000;

where the type of the symbolic constant (TAB_MAX in this case) is derived from
the type of the constant (1000 in this case, which sets the type of TAB_MAX
to integer).

With New Stanford Pascal, you can also specify consts like this:

const TAB_MAX : INTEGER = 1000;

which does not add much function.

But

const MESSAGE = 'This is a message';

is different from

const MESSAGE2 : CHAR (100) = 'This is a message';

the second form has length 100 and is padded with blanks to the right.

See more on the type CHAR (100) below;
the type CHAR (100) is not present in Standard Pascal.

The type in such const definitions can be any type, for example:

const TAB : array [1..5] of INTEGER = (10, 20, 30, 40, 50);

Of course, you can use the complete type syntax after the colon,
and you can use type identifiers of types defined before.

The so-called structured constants are specified using a new syntax
(new = introduced in 1982 at McGill university). As a rule of thumb:
every record and every array has to be enclosed by parantheses
in the constant specification.

See the following example for a record const.

type date = record
               year : 0 ... 9999;
               month : 0 .. 12 ;
               day : 0 .. 31 ;
            end;
     person = record
                 name: char (30);
                 birth: date
              end ;

const x : person = ( 'John' , (1957, 7, 4) );



Types

New Stanford Pascal supports all the types defined by Standard Pascal.

Sets

With the current implementation, the base type of sets is limited to
2000 elements. SET OF CHAR is possible, of course. SET OF 0 .. 1999
is possible, too.

At the moment there is a serious bug: the base type of a set must not
contain negative integers ... this will be addressed in the near future.

Files

TEXT files are fully supported, with some significant extensions
(see "Predefined Functions ...").

Binary files are supported, too, but only with constant length at
the moment. Not sure what happens with binary files where the base
type is a structure with variant records.

PACKED

the PACKED keyword is accepted, but ignored. All char arrays are
packed by default.

More types

There are some new types in New Stanford Pascal

- CHAR (n)

CHAR (n) is simply an abbreviation for PACKED ARRAY [1 .. n] OF CHAR.
CHAR (n) - called CHAR arrays - are character strings which always have
a fixed length. It is possible to assign shorter CHAR arrays to
longer CHAR arrays (by a simple assignment). The longer CHAR array
will be padded with blanks. Same goes for shorter CHAR array constants.

It is NOT possible to assign a longer CHAR array to a shorter one;
you will have to use the SUBSTR function in this case.

CHAR array constants are limited to 254 bytes; they can simply be
terminated on one line and continued on the next line.

- STRING (n)

In contrast to CHAR (n), STRING (n) is a varying length character string.
A STRING variable has two control fields - one holding the maximum length
as allowed by the definition, and the other holding the actual length
(which may be zero). These fields can be queried by the MAXLENGTH and
the LENGTH builtin functions.

It is possible to assign STRINGs to CHARs and vice versa. But keep in
mind that, when assigning CHARs to STRINGs, the trailing blanks of the
CHAR will be copied, too. To prevent this, you may use the RTRIM function
(see later).

STRINGs can be concatenated etc. - see more on the later paragraphs
on predefined functions etc.

In main storage, STRINGs are stored in their defined maximum length
most of the time. During processing, the STRINGs may live in a so-called
string workarea which is handled by the runtime system and which is
garbage-collected automatically.

STRINGs can, of course, be part of arrays or records.

- DECIMAL (n, m)

This type is supported and can be used.
It will support decimal computations in the future.
At the moment it is simply another name for the REAL type,
with one exception:

if you WRITE a DECIMAL value, it is automatically written with
the number of decimal digits as derived from the DECIMAL type definition.

See this example:

var X : DECIMAL (9, 2);

    ...

    WRITE (X);   /* same as WRITE (X : 11 : 2); */

n + 2 is used for the width specification,
so that the decimal point and a minus (if needed) can be written, too.

With REAL instead of DECIMAL (9,2), WRITE (X) would write a representation
with mantissa and exponent.


Variables

There is not much difference to Standard Pascal in the variable definitions
with one exception:

New Stanford Pascal suports the initialization of variables at the time
of the definition.

This is done using the constant syntax (even structured constants are
allowed, see above).

for example:

var x : person := ( 'John' , (1957, 7, 4) );
    i : integer := 0;
    ok : boolean := true;

the type person used here is defined above in the types section.

The only difference from the const definition above is the keyword var
and the := here instead of the = there.

In fact, the compiler accepts = and := at both places, but a warning is
issued, if := is used on const definitions and if = is used on var definitions.

The internal handling is different;
the variables defined here live on the runtime stack and therefore
the initialization must be carried out at runtime using machine instructions
EVERY TIME when the block which contains this definition is entered.
So such a definition can be costly, please keep this in mind.


Static Variables

Static variables can be specified much the same as "normal" (auto)
variables by simply replacing the var keyword by the static keyword.

for example:

static x : person := ( 'John' , (1957, 7, 4) );
       i : integer := 0;
       ok : boolean := true;

static is a new reserved word of New Stanford Pascal.

In contrast to variables with initialization, these initializations
of static data is carried out once (at compile time), so that there is
no performance penalty.

Modules (see above) cannot have global variables, but they can have
global static data which are common to all (external) procedures and
functions defined in a module. This is so-called static data local to
the module (private storage hidden from the users of the interfaces
of the module).


Procedures and Functions



Statements



Predefined Procedures and Functions



Allocation of external (file system) files to Pascal files

On mainframe systems, the names of the Pascal external files are simply
used as DDNames and can be assigned to "real" files using the mechanisms of the
operating system used (DD statements on MVS or z/OS, FILEDEF on VM/CMS).

The name of the Pascal external file, as seen from outside, is the name of the
Pascal file variable, but only the first eight characters. All files which
are defined in the main procedure (top level), are external, no matter if
they appear in the program statement or not.

Because modules don't have a top level procedure (and no top-level variables),
they don't have external file variables of their own.

But:

- they can access files passed to them by (var) parameter
- they can access the six predefined files
- they can have a pointer to a file in the global (private) static area
(which must be set by a procedure call, before it can be used)
- at the moment, a module cannot have a file declaration in its static area

On non-mainframe systems, the allocation of files works virtually the same
way as on mainframes.

The Pascal external file names (first 8 bytes only) are used to access
the file system, if nothing special is done.

But: you can override this filename by using an environment variable.

On Windows:

SET DD_INPFILE=c:\work\inpfile.txt

this sets the "real" filename for the Pascal file INPFILE.

SET DD_INPFILE=

this resets the environment; the "real" file INPFILE is used

SET DD_OUTFILE=*stdout*

all Pascal writes to file OUTFILE go to stdout.

The file INPUT is assigned to stdin by default (but can be reassigned);
The file OUTPUT is assigned to stdout by default (but can be reassigned).




Run Time Options



Command Line Parameters



