            P-CODE INTERMEDIATE ASSEMBLER LANGUAGE
            (PAIL-4)

            Erik J. Gilbert and David W. Wall
            TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 148
            March 1978
            COMPUTER SYSTEMS LABORATORY
            Departments of Electrical Engineering
            and Computer Science
            Stanford University
            Stanford, California 94305

  The authors wish to acknowledge crucial support for this work which
  has been received from the Department of the Navy via Office of Naval
  Research Order Numbers NOOO14-76-F-0023, NOOO14-77-F-0023, and
  NOOO14-78-F-0023 to the University of California Lawrence Livermore
  Laboratory (which is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy under
  Contract No. W-7405-Eng-48), from the Computations Group of the
  Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (supported by the U.S. Department
  of Energy under Contract No. EY-76-C-O3-O5l5), and from the Stanford
  Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (which receives support from the
  Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the National Science
  Foundation). The authors also wish to acknowledge the fellowship
  support of their graduate studies which was extended by the National
  Science Foundation during the academic year. This work has been
  performed under Contract No. LLL P09083403, Principal Investigator,
  Professor Gio Wiederhold.



            P-CODE INTERMEDIATE ASSEMBLER LANGUAGE
            (PAIL-4)

            Erik J. Gilbert and David W. Wall
            TECHNICAL NOTE NO. 148
            March 1978
            COMPUTER SYSTEMS LABORATORY
            Departments of Electrical Engineering
            and Computer Science
            Stanford University
            Stanford, California 94305

  ABSTRACT

  The syntax and semantics of P-Code, the intermediate language used in
  the current S-1 programming system is described.

  INDEX TERMS: Intermediate language, P-Code, Semantics, S-1


| I used the 1978 paper of Gilbert and Wall as a starting point to
| write my own documentation of the P-Code language, as it is now
| implemented in the 2016 version of the Stanford Pascal compiler.
|
| I have tried to minimize the changes. There have already been
| some differences between the P-Code language described here
| and the language as it was implemented in the 1982 McGill
| version of the compiler.
|
| Bernd Oppolzer, Leinfelden-Echterdingen, Germany - Nov. 2016



  O.   Table of Contents

  I.   Introduction
       A. Purpose
       B. Acknowledgement

  II.  Architecture of the Stack Computer
       A. Static environment
       B. Dynamic environment

  III. Detailed Language Description
       A. Syntax diagrams
       B. Instruction and standard procedure summary
       C. Detailed instruction descriptions
       D. Detailed standard procedure descriptions



  I. Introduction


  A. Purpose

  This document describes the intermediate code produced by the PASCAL
  compiler currently in use at SLAC. This intermediate code is called
  P-Code. It runs on a hypothetical machine called the Stack Computer
  (SC). The purpose behind compiling into this intermediate form is to
  make the PASCAL compiler more portable from one system to another; one
  need only rewrite the P-Code translator or interpreter to bring up the
  entire PASCAL compiler.

  The purpose of this document is to describe the syntax and semantics
  of P-Code assembler language text as it is output by the PASCAL
  compiler, so that the PASCAL implementor may use this description to
  construct an interpreter or translator for a particular system. The
  existence of P-Code assembler language assumes the existence of an
  underlying machine (the Stack Computer). In order to most clearly
  define the P-Code assembler language it is necessary to make
  occasional references to the detailed structure of this underlying
  machine. However, it should be noted that the interface being defined
  by this document is that of the source level P-Code, NOT the
  underlying Stack Computer. Hence, for instance, an actual
  implementation of an interpreter for P-Code may vary significantly in
  detailed structure from the SC referred to herein.

  Unfortunately, the definition of the interface between the PASCAL
  compiler and a P-Code interpreter or translator is not entirely clean
  and clear-cut. For instance, the code for the PASCAL compiler contains
  a number of P-Code implementation-dependent parameters. Therefore, the
  reader is warned that this document is not an absolutely complete
  definition of the interface, since for picking out certain fine
  details it will undoubtedly be necessary to refer to the source code
  for the PASCAL compiler, the P-Code interpreter, etc.


  B. Acknowledgement

  The authors wish to acknowledge crucial support for this work which
  has been received from the Department of the Navy via Office of Naval
  Research Order Numbers NOOO14-76-F-0023, NO0014-77-F-0023, and
  NOO014-78-F-0023 to the University of California Lawrence Livermore
  Laboratory (which is operated for the U. S. Department of Energy under
  Contract No. W-7405-Eng-48), from the Computations Group of the
  Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (supported by the U. S. Department
  of Energy under Contract No. BY-76-C-03-0515), and from the Stanford
  Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (which receives support from the
  Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the National Science
  Foundation). The authors also wish to acknowledge the fellowship
  support of their graduate studies which was extended by the National
  Science Foundation during the academic year.

  Portions of the second section of this document were taken with some
  modification from "The PASCAL (P) Compiler Implementation Notes" by
  Nori, Ammann, Jensen, and Nageli. That text has proven invaluable in
  the preparation of this document, and the reader seeking additional
  information (especially historical) should consult that text.



  II. Architecture of the Stack Computer


  A. Static environment

  The Stack Computer consists of four registers and a memory.

  The registers are:

  1) PC: the program counter;
  2) SP: the stack pointer;
  3) MP: the mark pointer;
  4) NP: the new pointer.

  The PC has the usual meaning. The meaning of SP, MP, and NP will
  become apparent when we describe the dynamic environment. The memory
  can be thought of as two linear arrays of storage units (words): one
  of these parts of memory is referred to as the code store, labelled
  CODE; the other part is referred to as the data store, labelled STORE.
  Their functions are obvious. Note that PC is always an index into
  CODE, and that SP, MP, and NP are always indices into STORE. Note also
  that the CODE array is read-only whereas the STORE array is
  read/write.

  Each element of CODE is an instruction with four fields: the OP field,
  the T field, the P field, and the Q field. The actual lengths of these
  fields are implementation-dependent with the restrictions that the OP
  field should be at least 7 bits long, the T field should be at least 4
  bits, the P field should be at least 4 bits, and the Q field should be
  at least large enough to hold any index into CODE or STORE. The OP
  field specifies the particular operation to be performed. The T field
  specifies the type(s) of one or more explicit or implicit operands.
  The P field (usually) specifies the lexical level of declaration of a
  variable being accessed. The meaning of the Q field is highly
  instruction-dependent, but it usually contains an offset or an item
  count of some kind.

  Each element of STORE has two fields: the type field and the data
  field. The type field tells the datatype of the data field, e.g.
  INTEGER, REAL, BOOLEAN, SET, etc. The data field can have any value
  legal for the type specified.


  B. Dynamic environment

  At P-Code run time, STORE is subdivided into two parts: one part
  contains constants of various kinds, whereas the other caters to the
  varying demands of data store, as required by the execution of PASCAL
  programs. This is depicted below.

  The stack grows from O upwards and consists of all directly
  addressable data according to the data declarations.

  Storage overflow occurs if SP and NP meet. The heap grows downwards
  from the point where the constants begin; its growth is dictated by
  use of the

  The following points are worth noting regarding the dynamic use of
  elements of STORE: the compiler's use of the heap resembles a second
  stack and so a very simple heap mechanism suffices. However, an
  implementor desiring more flexibility could implement a more complex
  free-storage handling mechanism. Though it should be clear from the
  picture, please note that SP points to the top of the stack and NP
  points to the top of the heap. Please also note that this usage of the
  word "heap" is quite different from the sorting data structure of the
  same name used by Knuth and others.

  The stack has further internal structure; this structure allows a
  correspondence between the dynamic evaluation of a PASCAL program and
  its static text in that necessary links are maintained, dynamically,
  so that the accessible objects are those dictated by static program
  text (except for parameters - of course). To amplify, the stack
  consists of a sequence of "data segments," each of them "belonging" to
  an activation of a procedure or a function (except the first data
  segment, which starts at location 0, and which belongs to the
  outermost block, viz., the program block).

  Most dynamically allocated storage entities (particularly program
  variables) are accessed using this internal structure of the stack.
  Each such entity is statically associated with a particular block of
  program text, which is in turn statically nested inside other blocks.
  Thus, with each such entity may be associated a "static level number,"
  i.e. the nesting level of the block in which it is declared. Since the
  program can at one time access variables declared in at most one block
  having a particular static level number, the specification at
  instruction execution time of a level number together with a data
  segment displacement uniquely identifies each such dynamic entity.

  Thus, the STORE addressing mechanism of P-Code instructions is defined
  in terms of this data segment structure. A piece of the dynamic stack
  can be addressed directly in terms of its absolute address, but it is
  often addressed by a pair of numbers (P,Q) as follows:

  P is the static level number of the entity being accessed, and Q is
  the displacement into the data segment (which is dynamically defined
  by P) of the actual data of the entity. Static level numbers of
  storage begin at 1 for data entities in the outermost static level,
  and increase by 1 for each nested procedure. This corresponds to the
  indexing of the procedure nesting levels used by the ENT instruction;
  the main program has level 1 and the level increases by 1 for each
  nesting. This has the effect that variables declared in a given
  procedure have a static level number equal to the nesting level number
  of that procedure. From all this it follows that the Stack Computer
  stack implementation must be defined such that all dynamic entities
  may be accessed in this way.

  Since any given target machine may use a somewhat different addressing
  structure from that used by the hypothetical Stack Computer, one
  should be careful to ensure that P-Code addresses actually point to
  the relevant data object, and not to a hypothetical base address, e.g.
  virtual zero-origin addressing of arrays. This may mean that a P-Code
  program will have apparently unnecessary address adjustments (e.g.
  INCs and DECs) which a good translator will then optimize out.

  The outermost data segment (containing entities with static level 1)
  contains a few specially distinguished elements, used for
  communication with the outside world. The addresses of these elements
  are called "file addresses," since they are used by the emitted P-Code
  to identify the different files used. Each element is a storage unit
  of type character, and is used as the PASCAL-defined associated buffer
  variable for the corresponding file. Since the elements are in the
  outermost data segment, the static level number of any address pair
  used to reference them is 1. The displacements are assigned by the
  PASCAL compiler starting from the value of the PASCAL compiler CONST
  parameter "FIRSTFILBUF." At present, six files are predefined, so user
  defined files are assigned starting at FIRSTFILBUF + 6. The predefined
  files are as follows:

  FIRSTFILBUF           INPUT
  FIRSTFILBUF + 1       OUTPUT
  FIRSTFILBUF + 2       PRD
  FIRSTFILBUF + 3       PRR
  FIRSTFILBUF + 4       QRD
  FIRSTFILBUF + 5       QRR

| FIRSTFILBUF is at position 248 in the current implementation; every
| file buffer (called Pascal FCB = File Control Block) needs 12 bytes
| (for textfiles).
|
| The first 4 bytes hold a pointer to the FILDEF (a file definition
| structure, which contains some Pascal related informations like EOLN
| and EOF flags, and the QSAM-DCB). The next 4 bytes hold the record
| size, but only for binary (non-text) files. The next bytes hold the
| actual file variable (e.g. INPUT-> for the file INPUT).
|
| So we now have
|
| INPUT  - at location 248
| OUTPUT - at location 260
| PRD    - at location 272
| PRR    - at location 284
| QRD    - at location 296
| QRR    - at location 308
|
| The current date is stored at position 328 (10 bytes long).

  A data segment consists of the following sequence of information: a
  "mark-stack" part; a "parameter" section if there are any parameters
  to the procedure or function to which the data segment belongs; a
  "local data" section if there are any local variables declared within
  the procedure or function to which the data segment belongs; and
  finally, any temporary elements which may be required in the program
  evaluation process. The register MP always points to the mark-stack
  part of the most recently allocated data segment in the stack.

  The mark-stack part consists of several consecutive fields containing
  information necessary to maintain the dynamic environment and to allow
  the old dynamic environment to be restored upon return from this one.
  This information may vary from implementation to implementation, but
  is likely to contain such items as the return address, static and
  dynamic links, a function return value, etc. An initial mark-stack
  part is set up by executing an MST instruction. An implementor of a
  P-Code translator or interpreter must decide on a precise format for
  the mark-stack part and implement the MST instruction accordingly.

  The parameter section consists of two parts, both of which may be
  empty. The first part consists of elements which are either: (a)
  Pointers (indices into STORE) in case the corresponding parameters are
  of type "call-by-reference" or of type "call-by-value" but the size of
  the parameter is larger than the size of a scalar or set; or (b) the
  parameter is "call-by-value" and the value itself is passed as it
  requires less than or equal to the amount of space occupied by a
  scalar or set. The second part pertains only to call-by-value
  parameters whose size is greater than the amount of space occupied by
  a scalar or set. In such a case, for each of such parameters, space is
  allocated as required by their respective sizes.

  In order to effect a procedure/function call, a mark-stack instruction
  (MST) is executed with a parameter which allows the links to be
  filled. Then follows a series of expression evaluations to fill in the
  first part of the parameter section. After this a call-user-procedure
  instruction (CUP) or a call-standard-procedure instruction (CSP) is
  executed with appropriate parameters. The reserving of space for the
  second part of the parameter section as well as the local data is done
  by the ENT instruction, the first to be executed in the procedure
  body. The copying of large call-by-value parameters into the second
  part of the parameter section is done by instructions immediately
  after the ENT instruction.

  The MST, CUP, CSP, ENT, and RET instructions must be implemented so as
  to keep the addressing structure of the stack consistent with the
  assumptions made by the P-Code emitted by the PASCAL compiler.
  Specifically, the parameters to a called procedure or function must,
  after execution of the ENT which comes first in the called code, be
  located at the proper displacements into the current data segment.
  These displacements are assigned starting from the value of the PASCAL
  compiler CONST parameter "LCAFTMST," the number of storage units which
  are expected to be added to the stack by the MST instruction. Also,
  for a function (which returns a value), the compiler emits code to
  store the value at displacement "FNCRSLT" (another CONST parameter)
  prior to the RET instruction. The implementor must ensure that upon
  return the stack is restored to its original state before the call,
  plus the function value pushed onto the top of the stack.

  "Lif had picked up a brick from the heap and put it in place on the
  stack and smiled in embarrassment."

  - Ursula K. LeGuin, "Things"



  III. Detailed Language Description


  A. Syntax diagrams

  opcode class 1 = ( ABI, ABR, ADI, ADR, AND, CHR, DIF, DVI, DVR, EOF,
                     FLO, FLT, INN, INT, IOR, MOD, MPI, MPR, NGI, NGR,
                     NOT, ODD, ORD, PRE, RST, SAV, SBI, SBR, SGS, SQI,
                     SQR, SUC, TOF, TON, TRC, UNI )

  opccde class 2 = ( BGN, IXA, LAD, LOC, MOV, NEW )

  opcode class 3 = ( LDA )

  opcode class 4 = ( FJP, UJP, XJP )

  opcode class S = ( EQU, GEO, GRT, LEQ, LES, NEQ )

  opcode class 6 = ( PAR, RET, STO )

  opcode class 7 = ( DEC, INC, IND, LDO, SRO )

  opcode class 8 = ( CHK, LOD, STR )

  type = ( A, B, C, D, H, I, J, M, N, P, Q, R, S, X )

  standard proc id = ( ATN, CLK, COS, EIO, ELN, EOF, EXP, GET, LOG, NEW,
                       PUT, RDC, RDI, RDR, RDS, RES, REW, RLN, RST, SAV,
                       SIN, SIO, SQT, WLN, WRB, WRC, WRI, WRR, WRS, XIT )

  proc id = identifier

  integer, string, real, and identifier as defined in PASCAL syntax.


  B. Instruction and standard procedure summary

  Alphabetic List of Instructions:

  The stack contents are described in terms of the type of the value on
  the stack. Please note that this "type" is neither the same as the
  "types" used in PASCAL source code, nor the same as whatever concept
  of "type" the eventual target machine may implement. The P-Code
  emitted by the PASCAL compiler is "aware" of precisely the following
  set of types:

  {int,char,real,bool,set,adr},

  where "int" means an integer (which may be a quarter-word, half-word,
  single-word, or double-word), and "real" may be a single-word or a
  double-word.

  Another comment is needed on the handling of multiple size
  representations for types integer and real. In PASCAL, arithmetic on
  subrange types may legally yield a result outside the subrange. Thus,
  the P-Code implementation must be such that arithmetic on quarter-word
  or half-word integers may yield as large a result as a single-word
  integer. This does not necessarily imply that such arithmetic will
  always yield a single-word result, but rather that it might yield up
  to a single-word result in order to avoid overflow. The general
  principle here is that the Stack Computer may make implicit
  conversions between subrange types and different sizes of types.


  C. Detailed instruction descriptions

  In the descriptions below, the notation "(int)" means any integer
  type, namely "Q,H,I,D" indicating quarter-, half-, single-, and
  double-word integers. The notation "<real>" correspondingly means
  "R,X" indicating single- and double-word reals.

  ABI

  Evaluates the absolute value of the integer on top of the stack, pops
  that integer, and pushes the absolute value.

  ABR

  Evaluates the absolute value of the real on top of the stack, pops
  that real, and pushes the absolute value.

  ADI

  Evaluates the sum of the top two integers on the stack, pops those two
  integers, and pushes the sum.

  ADR

  Evaluates the sum of the top two reals on the stack, pops those two
  reals, and pushes the sum.

  AND

  Evaluates the logical AND of the top two booleans on the stack, pops
  those two booleans, and pushes the logical AND.

  BGN

  (Compile-time instruction) Specifies translator options. If the
  instruction parameter is 1, translates the P-Code into a 370/assembler
  source text; otherwise translates it into an object module suitable
  for loading.

  CHK

  The first parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  (A,C,(int>,J,S,P), indicating that the top item on the stack is an
  address, character, integer, index (also an integer), an ordinal
  number for an element of a set, or parameter to a procedure call. The
  second and third parameters are the lower and upper bounds which are
  legal for the item on top of the stack; in the case of sets these
  bounds are determined by the maximum number of elements that can
  appear in a set. In the case of addresses, the lower bound may be
  either 0 or -1; if -1 it means that the nil address is also allowed.
  The top item is tested against these bounds. If it is not between
  them, an error condition is raised; otherwise nothing happens.

  CHR

  Converts the ordinal integer on top of the stack into a character,
  pops that integer, and pushes the character equivalent.

  CSP

  Calls the standard procedure specified in the instruction, saving the
  return address. The exact behavior of the stack depends on which
  procedure is called; see the descriptions of the standard procedures.

| CUP

  Calls a specified user procedure. The first parameter in the
  instruction is a type from the set (P,A,B,C,(int>,<real)), indicating
  that the procedure is untyped (i.e. of type "procedure") or of type
  address, boolean, character, integer, or real. The second parameter
  contains some coded information: it is twice the number of parameters
  for the procedure called plus a bit which is 1 if and only if a
  floating point save area is required. The third parameter is the name
  of the user procedure being called.

| There is a fourth parameter to CUP in the McGill implementation; the
| fourth parameter is the position where the new stack segment should
| start, relative to the start of the actual stack segment. This
| position includes 72 bytes for the register save area and 8 more bytes
| for the return value (at position 72) and other control information.
| This fourth parameter turns the MST instruction useless, IMO. In fact,
| I implemented the P-Code interpreter on Windows and Linux without
| using the MST instruction.

  DEC

  The first parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  {A,B,C,<int>}, indicating that the top item on the stack is to be
  treated as an address, boolean, character, integer, or index (also an
  integer). The second parameter is an integer decrement amount. This
  instruction examines the top item on the stack and replaces it by the
  item of the same type whose ordinal number is less than the ordinal
  number of the original top item by exactly the decrement amount.
  Loosely, this instruction decrements the top of the stack by an amount
  given as the second parameter in the instruction.

| DEF

  (Compile-time instruction) Defines the meaning of the label on this
  instruction to be the value of the integer parameter.

| DEF needed to be enhanced to support integer and char constants,
| because it is used to store case labels together with the XJP
| instructions and its branch tables (or min/max values). Because
| XJP had a portability issue, this extension was needed.
|
| DEF I,int and DEF C,'char' are supported - and the DEF char constant
| should be used for char case labels.
|
| DEF is at this moment only used with XJP and case labels and at the
| end of a procedure (after RET) to build an integer constant holding
| the code size of the CSECT, which is referenced by the ENT instruction

| DFC
|
| See LCA; the changes to LCA S (regarding sets) apply to DFC, too.
|
| This instruction, which was probably implemented between 1979 and
| 1982 at McGill university, is used to define static constants.
| It is used to support the definition of structured constants, that
| is, arrays or structures including initializations at compile time.
| The label field of the instruction contains a number, which is the
| offset of the constant in the constant area. The first parameter is a
| type from the set {A,B,H,I,M,S}, indicating address, byte, halfword,
| integer, string or set. The second parameter is a constant of the
| appropriate type.
|
| When adding support for long string constants in 2016 (> 64), I added
| an optional length field to the DFC M variant. If the type of DFC is M
| and the second parameter does not start with an apostroph, it is a
| length field, which specifies the length of the string which follows
| (as 3rd parameter). In this case, the string may be shorter and is
| padded with blanks to the right. Furthermore, if the string does not
| fit into one line, it may be split on several lines; it is closed on
| one line by an apostrophe and a comma and then reopened again on the
| following line. The comma indicates that another line follows.

  DIF

  Evaluates the set difference given by subtracting the set on top of
  the stack from the set which is second on the stack, pops those two
  sets, and pushes the set difference.

  DVI

  Evaluates the quotient without remainder (DIV) given by dividing the
  integer which is second on the stack by the integer on top of the
  stack, pops those two integers, and pushes the quotient.

  DVR

  Evaluates the floating-point quotient given by dividing the real which
  is second on the stack by the real which is on top of the stack, pops
  those two reals, and pushes the quotient.

  ENT

  This is the first instruction executed by any program or procedure.
  its exact effect depends on the implementation of the Stack Computer,
  but its general purpose is to record the information necessary to
  restore the static environment of the calling routine upon return, and
  to set up the new static environment for the freshly-invoked
  procedure. This may include recording static pointers, allocating data
  areas, updating displays, and so forth. The ENT must be preceded by a
  proc id which uniquely identifies the procedure or program and which
  is the label used by CUPs to refer to their destination. The ENT is
  followed by seven parameters (see syntax diagram). The first parameter
  is a type from the set {P,A,B,C,<int>,<real>}, indicating that the
  entered procedure is untyped (i.e. of type "procedure") or of type
  address, boolean, character, integer, or real. The second parameter is
  the static level number of the procedure (starting at 1 for the main
  program). The third parameter is a label whose value is the length of
  the data area, including any save areas allocated by the MST
  instruction, for this procedure. The fourth parameter is a prefix of
  the original PASCAL procedure name. The fifth parameter is a one if a
  general purpose register save area is required, otherwise zero. The
  sixth parameter is a one if a floating point register save area is
  required (assuming this is a real valued function), otherwise zero.
  The seventh parameter is one to indicate that debugging is in effect
  if the QRD file is being processed, otherwise zero.

  EOF

  This instruction is never generated, but its function is to check for
  end-of-file for the input file whose address is on top of the stack.
  For a detailed description see the standard procedure EOF.

  EQU

  The first parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  {A,<int),C,<real),B,S,M}, meaning respectively that the top two
  elements on the stack are addresses, integers, characters, reals,
  booleans, sets, or the addresses of multiple-unit arrays or records.
  if the first parameter is M, there will be a second parameter - an
  integer - which tells how many storage units the structures occupy.
  This instruction compares the two addresses, integers, characters,
  reals, booleans, sets, or entire multiple-unit structures for
  equality, pops the top two elements from the stack, and pushes the
  boolean TRUE if the items were equal and FALSE otherwise.

  FJP

  Jumps to the address given in the instruction if the boolean on top of
  the stack is false; whether true or false, the boolean is popped. The
  stack must be empty after this instruction is executed.

  FLO

  Converts the integer which is second on the stack to a real value, and
  replaces the integer by the real, leaving undisturbed the value on top
  of the stack.

  FLT

  Converts the integer on top of the stack to a real value, and replaces
  the integer by the real.

  GEQ

  The parameters in this instruction are the same as for the EQU
  instruction. The items are compared and popped from the stack. If the
  item which is second on the stack is greater than or equal to the item
  on top of the stack, the boolean TRUE is pushed; otherwise the boolean
  FALSE is pushed. Note that in the case of sets, >= refers to the
  superset operation, and that in the case of multiple unit structures,
  the structures compared are addressed by the top two elements of the
  stack but are not themselves on the stack.

  GRT

  The parameters in this instruction are the same as in the EQU
  instruction, except that the type may not be S (set). The items are
  compared and popped from the stack. If the item which is second on the
  stack is greater than the item on top of the stack, the boolean value
  TRUE is pushed on the stack; otherwise FALSE is pushed. Note that in
  the case of multiple-unit structures, the structures compared are
  addressed by the top two elements on the stack, but are not themselves
  on the stack.

  INC

  The first parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  {A,B,C,<int>}, indicating that the top item on the stack is to be
  treated as an address, boolean, character, integer, or index (also an
  integer). The second parameter is an integer increment amount. This
  instruction examines the top item on the stack and replaces it by the
  item of the same type whose ordinal number is greater than the ordinal
  number of the original top item by exactly the decrement amount.
  Loosely, this instruction increments the top of the stack by an amount
  given as the second parameter in the instruction.

  IND

  The first parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  (A,B,C,<int),<real>,S); the second parameter is an integer index. The
  top of the stack contains an address. This instruction gets the item
  whose address is the sum of the address on the stack plus the index in
  the instruction. The type of this item is given by the type in the
  instruction. The address is popped from the stack, and the new item is
  pushed onto the stack.

| INN

  Checks to see if the ordinal integer which is second from the top of
  the stack is in the set on top of the stack. Pops the integer and the
  set, and pushes the boolean TRUE if the integer is a member of the set
  and FALSE otherwise.

| See LCA; because sets can be larger in the McGill implementation,
| they are represented on the stack by two items; length and address.

| INT

  Evaluates the set intersection of the set on the top of the stack and
  the set which is second on the stack, pops those two sets, and pushes
  the intersection.

| See LCA; because sets can be larger in the McGill implementation,
| they are represented on the stack by two items; length and address.
| That is: the stack contains 4 items (two sets) before the execution
| of the UNI instruction; 2 items are popped (one set).

  IOR

  Evaluates the logical inclusive OR of the two booleans on top of the
  stack, pops those two booleans, and pushes the inclusive OR.

  IXA

  The integer parameter in this instruction is a number of storage units
  required by an instance of a given data type. The index on top of the
  stack is multiplied by the storage size in the instruction and added
  to the address which is second on the stack, to give a new address.
  The base address and index are popped, and the new address is pushed
  onto the stack.

  LAB

  (Compile-time instruction) Defines the meaning of the label on this
  instruction to be the current value of the location counter. The stack
  must be empty when this instruction is seen.

  LAO

  Pushes an address onto the stack. The instruction has as a parameter
  an integer offset into the data area of static level number 1. The
  address pushed is the address of the location at that offset in the
  global (i.e. static level l) data area.

| LCA

  Pushes the address of the string given in the instruction onto the
  stack. The string itself will be in the constant area.

| See DFC; the changes to DFC M apply to LCA, too.
|
| With the McGill implementation, the base type of sets can have up to
| 256 elements, so SET OF CHAR is possible now. That means, that a set
| must be represented by 32 bytes in this maximum case (of course,
| there are smaller sets); the S constant representing the sets
| now can have up to 16 halfwords. A set furthermore is represented by
| two stack items instead of one; an address and a length. There are
| new instructions SLD (set load) and SMV (set move) that deal with
| sets ... see there.
|
| LCA with S loads the address of a set string representation onto the
| stack. The LCA instruction will be followed by a SLD instruction;
| see there.
|
| LCA S was enhanced further, because there were some portability
| issues that prohibited ports to ASCII platforms. The set constants
| of all sets are implemented as bit strings (in fact: strings of
| integer constants), but because the bit positions with char based
| sets are related to the code position of the char in the specific
| character set, the bit string representation is not portable.
| I changed that in the following way:
|
| - char based sets are represented by listing all the chars that
|   belong to the set (e.g. C32'BERND')
|
| - other sets are represented by bit strings, but using hexadecimal
|   digits, because IMO the bit representation can be derived easily
|   from the hex digits (e.g. X8'00f8004000102000')
|
| Such set constants can be processed in a portable way on other
| platforms, too.

  LDA

  The first parameter in the instruction is a static level number; the
  second parameter is an offset in the most recently activated data area
  for that static level. Calculates the absolute address of the location
  thus specified and pushes that address onto the stack. Warning:
  Because the addressing structure of the target machine may be slightly
  different from that of the Stack Computer, a P-Code program should
  never LDA an address in the first parameter area unless that address
  is intended for use outside the local scope, i.e. as a reference
  parameter to a called procedure.

| LDC

  Pushes a constant onto the stack. The first parameter in the
  instruction is a type from the set {I,C,R,N,B,S}, indicating that the
  constant to be loaded is integer, character, real, the nil pointer,
  boolean, or set. If the type is I, C, or R, the second parameter is a
  constant of that type, Just as expressed in PASCAL. If the type is N,
  there is no second parameter; the nil pointer is simply pushed. If the
  type is B, the second parameter is the integer O or 1, representing
  the booleans FALSE and TRUE.

- If the type is S, the second parameter is
- a list of four integers, separated by commas and surrounded by
- parentheses, whose low order 16 bits can be concatenated to produce
- the 64-bit representation of the set to be loaded.

| With the McGill implementation, the base type of sets can have up to
| 256 elements, for example SET OF CHAR is possible now. A set cannot
| be loaded by LDC any more. See LCA.

  LDO

  Pushes the value of a location in the data area of the outermost
  static level. The first parameter in the instruction is a type from
  the set {A,B,C,<int>,<real>,S}, indicating that the item to be loaded
  is an address, boolean, character, integer, real, or set. The second
  parameter is the offset of the desired location in the data area of
  the outermost static level.

  LEQ

  The parameters in this instruction are the same as for the EQU
  instruction. The items are compared and popped from the stack. If the
  item which is second on the stack is less than or equal to the item on
  top of the stack, the boolean TRUE is pushed; otherwise the boolean
  FALSE is pushed. Note that in the case of sets, <= refers to the
  subset operation, and that in the case of multiple unit structures,
  the structures compared are addressed by the top two elements of the
  stack but are not themselves on the stack.

  LES

  The parameters in this instruction are the same as in the EQU
  instruction, except that the type may not be S (set). The items are
  compared and popped from the stack. It" the item which is second on
  the stack is less than the item on top of the stack, the boolean value
  TRUE is pushed on the stack; otherwise FALSE is pushed. Note that in
  the case of multiple-unit structures, the structures compared are
  addressed by the top two elements on the stack, but are not themselves
  on the stack.

  LOC

  (Compile-time instruction) This instruction appears at regular
  intervals in the P-Code text to allow identification of code
  locations. The single integer parameter is the value of the location
  counter at the time the instruction is encountered. It could
  theoretically be used actually to set the value of the location
  counter, but implementations so far do not do this.

  LOD

  Pushes the value of a location in an arbitrary static level. The first
  parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  {A,B,C,<int>,<real),S}, indicating that the location to be loaded
  contains an address, boolean, character, integer, real, or set. The
  second parameter is a static level number; the third parameter is an
  offset in the data area for that static level.

  MOD

  Evaluates the remainder after integer division produced by dividing
  the integer which is second on the stack by the integer on top of the
  stack, pops those two integers, and pushes the remainder.

| MOV

  The parameter in the instruction is a number of storage units. Copies
  a block of that many values starting at the address on top of the
  stack to a block of that many storage units starting at the address
  which is second on the stack. The stack must be empty after this
  instruction is executed.

| If the parameter in the instruction is negative, the absolute value
| is used to control the length, but the parameters on the stack are
| used in the reverse order.

  MPI

  Multiplies the two integers on top of the stack, pops those integers,
  and pushes the integer product onto the stack.

  MPR

  Multiplies the two reals on top of the stack, pops those reals, and
  pushes the real product.

  MST

  This instruction is executed preparatory to loading the parameters on
  the stack for a user procedure call. The MST instruction is followed
  by code to evaluate and stack the parameters, if any, which is in
  turned followed by a CUP instruction. Its exact effect depends on the
  implementation of the Stack Computer, but its general purpose is to
  record the information necessary to restore the dynamic environment of
  the calling routine upon return. This may include recording dynamic
  pointers, allocating save areas, and so forth. The first parameter
  tells the level of the called procedure. The second parameter is the
  size in storage units of the first part of the parameter section for
  the callee. The third parameter is the regparm area size for the
  callee, and should be the same value as is specified in the SST
  instruction for the callee. See the SST instruction for details.

  NEQ

  The parameters in this instruction are the same as for the EQU
  instruction. The items are compared and popped from the stack. If the
  item which is second on the stack is not equal to the item on top of
  the stack, the boolean TRUE is pushed; otherwise the boolean FALSE is
  pushed. Note that in the case of multiple unit structures, the
  structures compared are addressed by the top two elements of the stack
  but are not themselves on the stack.

  NEW

  The parameter in the instruction is a number of storage units.
  Allocates that many new units on the heap, stores NP, which contains
  the new address of the top of the heap, into the location whose
  address is on the top of the stack, and pops that address from the
  stack. The stack must be empty after executing this statement.

  NGI

  Calculates the negative (additive inverse) of the integer on top of
  the stack, pops that integer, and pushes the integer negative.

  NGR

  Calculates the negative (additive inverse) of the real on top of the
  stack, pops that real, and pushes the real negative.

  NOT

  Calculates the logical NOT of the boolean value on top of the stack,
  pops that boolean, and pushes the logical NOT.

  ODD

  Determines whether the integer on top of the stack is odd or even,
  pops that integer, and pushes the boolean value TRUE if it was odd and
  FALSE if it was even.

  ORD

  Determines the ordinal value of the character, boolean, or integer
  value on top of the stack, pops the stack, and pushes this ordinal
  integer.

  PAR

  Notes that the value on top of the stack is about to be passed as a
  parameter to a procedure. The only argument to PAR is the type of the
  formal parameter to which it is being passed.

  PRE

  This instruction is never generated, but its function is to replace
  the scalar value on top of the stack by its immediate predecessor. The
  compiler generates a DEC 1 instruction instead.

  RET

  This instruction returns control to the procedure which called the
  current one. Its exact effect will depend on the implementation of the
  Stack Computer, but is likely to include resetting of static and
  dynamic pointers and displays, deallocation of data and save areas,
  and of course the physical jump back to the calling point. It has a
  single parameter which is a type from the set
  (P,A,B,C,<int>,<real),S}, indicating that the procedure is untyped
  (i.e. of type "procedure") or is returning a function value of type
  address, boolean, character, integer, real, or set.

  RST

  Deallocates all locations on the heap which appear on top of the
  location whose address is on top of the stack by setting NP (the "new"
  pointer) to that address, and pops that address from the stack. The
  stack must be empty after executing this statement.

  SAV

  Stores NP, which contains the address of the top element in the heap,
  at the location whose address is on top of the stack, and then pops
  that address from the stack. The stack must be empty after executing
  this statement.

  SBI

  Evaluates the integer given by subtracting the integer on top of the
  stack from the integer which is second on the stack, pops those two
  integers, and pushes the integer difference onto the stack.

  SBR

  Evaluates the real given by subtracting the real on top of the stack
  from the real which is second on the stack, pops those two reals, and
  pushes the real difference.

  SGS

  Creates a singleton set containing the ordinal integer on the top of
  the stack, pops that ordinal integer, and pushes the singleton set.

| SLD
|
| Set Load - This instruction has two parameters: it loads a set
| constant or variable to the stack for further processing. p (the first
| parameter) is the length of the set in bytes, and q is the target
| address. The binary representation of the set (the source) is found
| at the address which is on top of the stack; this address was placed
| there before. The SLD instruction pops this address, moves p bytes
| from the source address to q, and pushes p and q.

| SMV
|
| Set Move - This instruction has two parameters: it moves a set from
| the stack to a set variable in storage. Both parameters (p and q)
| are length parameters. If the second length is lower than the first
| length, only the number of bytes specified by the first length is
| moved. The rest of the bytes of the target set variable is set to
| zero.
|
| The sign of p may be negative or positive.
|
| If p is positive,
|
| - before the execution of SMV, address and length of the set are on
| top of the stack and on the second position; the target address is
| on the third position.
|
| If p is negative,
|
| - the absolute value of p is used as first length,
|
| - before the execution of SMV, the target address is on top of the
| stack and address and length of the set are on the second and third
| position.
|
| SMV pops all three stack items in both cases.

  SQI

  Calculates the square of the integer on top of the stack, pops that
  integer, and pushes the integer square onto the stack.

  SQR

  Calculates the square of the real on top of the stack, pops that real,
  and pushes the real square.

  SRO

  Pops a value from the stack into a location in the outermost static
  level. The first parameter in the instruction is a type from the set
  {A,B,C,(int>,<real>,S}, indicating that the value to be stored is an
  address, boolean, character, integer, real, or set. The second
  parameter is an offset into the data area of the outermost static
  level. The stack must be empty after this instruction is executed.

| SST

  (Compile-time instruction) Specifies certain attributes of the
  procedure whose label is the second parameter of the instruction. The
  first parameter is the type of the procedure, selected from
  (P,A,B,C,<int),<real>,S}. The third parameter is the static level of
  that procedure. The fourth parameter is the size in storage units of
  the first part of the parameter section. The fifth parameter is the
  size in storage units of the second part of the parameter section. The
  sixth parameter is the size in storage units of the locally declared
  variable storage. The seventh parameter is the regparm area size. This
  is the size of the initial portion of the first parameter section
  which is to be kept in registers. It should be at least 0, no more
  than the constant value MAXPAREG * WORDUNITS given in the P-Code
  translator, and no more than the size of the first parameter section.
  In addition, it should stop on a parameter boundary - i.e. the regparm
  area should not contain half of a double-word parameter. In practice
  it is desirable to make this value as large as possible subject to
  these constraints. Note - in no other context should the compiler
  worry about the fact that registers are used for parameters (except in
  the MST instruction, which gives this quantity in different contexts).

| This instruction doesn't exist in the McGill version of the compiler.

  STO

  Stores the value on top of the stack into the address which is second
  on the stack, and pops both from the stack. This instruction has as a
  parameter a type from the set {A,B,C,<int>,<real>,S}, indicating that
  the value to be stored is an address, boolean, character, integer,
  real, or set. The stack must be empty after this instruction is
  executed.

  STP

  (Compile-time instruction) Signals the end of the input program.

  STR

  Pops the value on top of the stack into a location in an arbitrary
  static level. The first parameter in this instruction is a type from
  the set {A,B,C,<int>,<real>,S}, indicating that the value to be stored
  is an address, boolean, character, integer, real, or set. The second
  parameter is a static level number; the third parameter is an offset
  into the data area of that static level. The stack must be empty after
  this instruction is executed.

  SUC

  This instruction is never generated, but its effect is to replace the
  scalar value on top of the stack by its immediate successor. The
  compiler generates an INC 1 instruction instead.

| TOF

  In the interpreter, turns off the execution trace. In the P-Code
  translator, turns off one of several kinds of traces based upon a
  keyword argument. These keyword arguments are not an official part of
  P-Code, but rather an addition to support the translator; they are
  described in "The SOPAIPILLA Maintenance Manual."

| This instruction doesn't exist in the McGill version of the compiler.

| TON

  In the interpreter, turns on the execution trace. In the P-Code
  translator, provides one of several kinds of traces based upon keyword
  arguments. These keyword arguments are not an official part of P-Code,
  but rather an addition to support the translator; they are described
  in "The SOPAIPILLA Maintenance Manual."

| This instruction doesn't exist in the McGill version of the compiler.

  TRC

  Calculates the value found by truncating the real number on top of the
  stack to an integer value, pops that real, and pushes the integer
  truncation.

  UJP

  Jumps unconditionally to the label given in the instruction. The stack
  must be empty after this instruction is executed.

| UNI

  Evaluates the set union of the two sets on top of the stack, pops
  those two sets, and pushes the union set.

| See LCA; because sets can be larger in the McGill implementation,
| they are represented on the stack by two items; length and address.
| That is: the stack contains 4 items (two sets) before the execution
| of the UNI instruction; 2 items are popped (one set).

| XJP

  This instruction performs a jump to a location indexed by the ordinal
  integer on top of the stack. It is used to implement CASE statements.
  It has as a parameter a label which is first of four lexicographically
  consecutive labels (e.g. L28, L29, L30, and L31). These four labels
  have, respectively, the following values:

  - The lowest legal value for the index on the stack,
  - The highest legal value for the index on the stack,
  - The code address of the branch table, and
  - The default address to which it should jump if the index is not
    in the permissible range.

  The branch table is a table of UJP (unconditional jump) instructions.
  This instruction first checks to see whether or not the index is in
  range; if not it jumps to the default address. If it is in range, it
  subtracts the lowest legal value from the ordinal integer and jumps to
  that displacement from the start of the branch table, which is in turn
  a jump to the appropriate piece of code. In either case, the index is
  popped from the stack. The stack must be empty after this instruction
  is executed.

| This instruction had a severe portability issue, which prevented the
| migration of the compiler to other platforms, which use other code
| sequences (for example ASCII). The problem was, that the branch tables
| were built on the EBCDIC character sequence, if the case variable is of
| type char. The layout of the branch tables was determined already by the
| first pass of the compiler, and so the P-Code file (*.PRR) could not be
| moved to another platform.
|
| I changed both passes of the compiler; the first pass builds a new
| "portable branch table", which means that together with the UJP branches
| a DEF constant with the relevant case label value is stored in the
| branch table. Furthermore, this value is stored in char representation.
| To this behalf, the DEF instruction was enhanced to have a type
| identifier, which can be C for char or I for integer.
|
| XJP needs only two labels with the new format, because the
| lowest and highest value need not be stored separately from the
| branch table with the new format.
|
| To make sure, that the new format is used, XJP now has a N before the
| branch target label, that is: XJP N,label
|
| Although only two labels are needed, the compiler reserves four labels
| as before, because the second pass of the compiler still needs two
| fields to hold the minimum and the maximum value. It computes these
| values by scanning the branch table (this is the only valid method,
| because min/max results depend on the platform and the character set).
| But XJP (new) branches to the former 3rd label; the former 1st and
| 2nd labels are not used by the (new) P-Code.
|
| E.g.: if XJP would have used L28, L29, L30 and L31 in the old variant,
| where L28 = lowest value, L29 = highest value, L30 = branch table
| and L31 = default address, it would now use L30 and L31 (with the
| same meaning) and leave L28 and L29 unused - free for the code
| generator. The old XJP had L28 as argument; the new XJP would look
| like this:
|
| XJP N,L30
|
| The old branch table only consisted of UJP instructions; the new
| branch table looks like this: DEF, UJP / DEF, UJP / ...
|
| The new XJP instruction, from a logical point of view, does not
| address the branch table directly, but it scans the branch table
| for matching DEF constants and takes the appropriate UJP branch.
| If it finds no match, it branches to the default address.
|
| Because not every possible case value in the case range needs to
| be stored in the branch table, the new branch table may be smaller
| in some cases (although the entries are double in size because of
| the DEF constants).
|
| The second pass of the compiler may construct the old representation,
| that is, real branch tables, for performance reasons. In fact, this
| is what PASCAL2.PAS on IBM Mainframe does.



  D. Detailed standard procedure descriptions

  ATN

  Evaluates the arctangent of the real on top of the stack, pops that
  real, and pushes the result.

  CLK

  Uses the integer argument on top of the stack to select among types of
  clock functions. At present, the only possible argument value is 1.
  When the argument is 1, the number of milliseconds of run time spent
  in the PASCAL program thus far is computed. The argument is popped and
  replaced by pushing the result.

  COS

  Evaluates the cosine of the real on top of the stack, pops that real,
  and pushes the result.

  EIO

  Signals the end of a group of I/O related instructions (which was
  started by a CSP SIO instruction). EIO may be used to signal any
  events which are convenient to place at the end of such a group of I/O
  instructions, but in particular its function includes popping a single
  value off the top of the stack. This value is usually the "file
  address," which is pushed on the stack prior to the SIO and remains
  there throughout the I/0 group.

  ELN

  Tests the EOLN condition for the file whose address is on top of the
  stack. The address is popped, the boolean result is pushed, and then
  an undefined value is pushed (so that the following CSP EIO
  instruction will have something to pop without popping the result).

  EOF

  Tests the EOF condition for the file whose address is on top of the
  stack. The address is popped, the boolean result is pushed, and then
  an undefined value is pushed (so that the following CSP EIO
  instruction will have something to pop without popping the result).

  EXP

  Evaluates the exponential of the real on top of the stack, pops that
  real, and pushes the result.

  GET

  Performs a GET on the file whose address is on top of the stack,
  appropriately filling the associated buffer with the gotten value.
  Leaves the file address on top of the stack. The stack must contain
  only the file address after this call is completed.

  LOG

  Evaluates the natural logarithm of the real on top of the stack, pops
  that real, and pushes the result.

  NEW

  This "standard procedure" appears in the implemented P-Code
  interpreter, but calls to it are never explicitly generated. Instead,
  the PASCAL compiler generates a NEW instruction (which the PASCAL
  interpreter translates into a CSP NEW). The stack must be empty after
  this call is completed. (See also the description of the NEW
  instruction.)

  PAK

  This procedure is defined (only) in the PASCAL compiler, but calls to
  it are not yet generated. Apparently it is intended for use by the
  PASCAL procedure PACK, which is not yet implemented in the P-Code
  PASCAL compiler.

  PUT

  Performs a PUT on the file whose address is on top of the stack. The
  associated buffer is then considered to have an undefined value.
  Leaves the file address on top of the stack. The stack must contain
  only the file address after this call is completed.

  RDB

  Reads a boolean value (represented externally by 0 for FALSE and 1 for
  TRUE) from the file whose address is second from the top of the stack
  into the boolean variable whose address is on top of the stack; note
  the automatic updating of the buffer associated with the file. The
  address on top of the stack is popped off, leaving the file address on
  top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file address after
  this call is completed.

  RDC

  Reads a single character from the file whose address is second from
  the top of the stack into the variable whose address is on top of the
  stack; note the automatic updating of the buffer associated with the
  file. The address on top of the stack is popped off, leaving the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  RDI

  Reads an integer from the file whose address is second from the top of
  the stack into the integer variable whose address is on top of the
  stack; note the automatic updating of the buffer associated with the
  file. The address on top of the stack is popped off, leaving the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  RDR

  Reads a real from the file whose address is second from the top of the
  stack into the real variable whose address is on top of the stack;
  note the automatic updating of the buffer associated with the file.
  The address on top of the stack is popped off, leaving the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  RDS

  Reads a string from the file whose address is third from the top of
  the stack into the area whose address is second from the top of the
  stack; note the automatic updating of the buffer associated with the
  file. The length of the string is given by the integer on top of the
  stack. The integer and the address on top of the stack are popped off,
  leaving the file address on top of the stack. The stack must contain
  only the file address after this call is completed.

  RES

  Performs the RESET operation for the file whose address is on top of
  the stack, updating the associated buffer accordingly. Leaves the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  REW

  Performs the REWRITE operation for the file whose address is on top of
  the stack, updating the associated buffer accordingly. Leaves the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  RLN

  Performs the READLN operation for the file whose address is on top of
  the stack, updating the associated buffer accordingly. Leaves the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  RST

  This "standard procedure" appears in the implemented P-Code
  interpreter, but calls to it are never explicitly generated. Instead,
  the PASCAL compiler generates a RST instruction (which the PASCAL
  interpreter translates into a CSP RST). The stack must be empty after
  this call is completed. (See also the description of the RST
  instruction.)

  SAV

  This "standard procedure" appears in the implemented P-Code
  interpreter, but calls to it are never explicitly generated. Instead,
  the PASCAL compiler generates a SAV instruction which the PASCAL
  interpreter translates into a CSP SAV). The stack must be empty after
  this call is completed. (See also the description of the SAV
  instruction.)

  SIN

  Evaluates the sine of the real on top of the stack, pops that real,
  and pushes the result.

  SIO

  Signals the start of a group of I/O related instructions (which will
  be ended by a CSP EIO instruction). SIO may be used to signal any
  events which are convenient to place at the start of such a group of
  I/0 instructions, but it is not required to perform any operation at
  all. When SIO is executed, the "file address" for the file to which
  the I/O group applies will be on top of the stack, and it should
  remain there after the SIO.

  SQT

  Evaluates the square root of the real on top of the stack, pops that
  real, and pushes the result.

  TRP

  Traps to a user defined external routine, passing on the parameters
  given as an integer second from the top of the stack, and an address
  (of some variable) on the top of the stack. The two arguments are
  popped off the stack. The stack must be empty after this call is
  completed.

  WLN

  Performs the WRITELN operation for the file whose address is on top of
  the stack, updating the associated buffer accordingly. Leaves the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  WRB

  Writes a boolean value (represented externally by O for FALSE and 1
  for TRUE) to the file whose address is third from the top of the stack
  from the boolean value which is second from the top of the stack. The
  width (in characters) of the field to be written is in the integer on
  top of the stack. The boolean value and the integer are popped,
  leaving the file address on top of the stack. The stack must contain
  only the file address after this call is completed.

  WRC

  Writes a single character to the file whose address is third from the
  top of the stack from the character value which is second from the top
  of the stack. The width (in characters) of the field to be written is
  in the integer on top of the stack. The character value and the
  integer are popped, leaving the file address on top of the stack. The
  stack must contain only the file address after this call is completed.

  WRI

  Writes an integer to the file whose address is third from the top of
  the stack from the integer which is second from the top of the stack.
  The width (in characters) of the field to be written is in the integer
  on top of the stack. Both integers are popped, leaving the file
  address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

| WRO

  This procedure is defined (only) in the PASCAL compiler, but no calls
  to it are generated. it is apparently intended for some I/O write
  purpose, but its exact intended function is unknown.

| This procedure doesn't exist in the McGill version of the compiler.

| WRP
|
| Writes a string representation of a pointer to the file whose
| address is third from the top of the stack. The pointer to be
| written is second from the top of the stack. The width (in
| characters) of the field to be written is in the integer on top
| of the stack. If the width is zero, it defaults to the standard
| pointer size of the environment (which is 8 on the VM/370
| implementation of Stanford Pascal; WRP writes 8 hex digits).
| The pointer and the integer are popped, leaving the file address
| on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file address
| after this call is completed.
|
| This procedure was added in the 2016 version of the compiler

  WRR

  Writes a real to the file whose address is third from the top of the
  stack from the real which is second from the top of the stack. The
  width (in characters) of the field to be written is in the integer on
  top of the stack. The real and the integer are popped, leaving the
  file address on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file
  address after this call is completed.

  WRS

  Writes a string to the file whose address is fourth from the top of
  the stack from the area whose address is third from the top of the
  stack. The length of the string is given by the integer on top,
  whereas the actual width (in characters) of the field to be written is
  in the integer second from the top of the stack. The string area
  address and the two integers are popped, leaving the file address on
  top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file address after
  this call is completed.

| WRX
|
| Writes a string representation of a scalar value to the file whose
| address is fourth from the top of the stack. The scalar value is
| third from the top of the stack. The actual width (in characters)
| of the field to be written is in the integer second from the top
| of the stack. The field on top of the stack contains a pointer
| to the scalar type description vector, which is constructed by
| the compiler; it consists of pairs of offsets and lengths of
| string representations for the values of the scalar type; highest
| value first. The offset of the first (highest) scalar value is the
| highest scalar value plus 1, multiplied by 4; this way, the function
| implementing the WRX procedure can check for the correct range of
| the scalar (0 .. max) simply by looking at the first offset. If the
| scalar value is outside this range, WRX simply writes WRX:nnnn,
| where nnnn is the value of the scalar in decimal (no ABEND).
| Three of the four parameters are popped, leaving the file address
| on top of the stack. The stack must contain only the file address
| after this call is completed.
|
| This procedure was added in the 2016 version of the compiler

  XIT

  Terminates program execution, with a final "return code" given by the
  integer on the top of the stack. The stack must be empty after this
  call is completed, at which time it vanishes in a cloud of greasy
  black smoke.

