ABS        is a legacy Pascal function; it returns the absolute value of the argument

ADDR       new with New Stanford Pascal; ADDR returns the address of the argument
           (which should be a variable or an array element etc.); the value returned
           has the type ANYPTR (a type compatible to every other pointer type)

ALLOC      this new function allocated a number of bytes on the new LE inspired heap
           (much like C's malloc)

ALLOCX     directly calls the ALLOC function of the underlying OS (no management,
           no optimization)

APPEND     Opens a file for output. Used to append new content at the end of the file.
           Similar to REWRITE, but REWRITE starts from the beginning of the file
           and overwrites old content

ARCTAN     arcus tangens function (Fortran library on the mainframe)

CARD       legacy Pascal function

CHKALLOC   description will be added later

CHKHEAP    description will be added later

CHR        legacy Pascal function, converts integer to char

CLOCK      compute CPU time in clock units

CLOSE      new function: CLOSE a file

COMPRESS   replaces sequences of spaces in the string by only one space
           (like in Pascal/VS)

COS        cosinus function (Fortran library on the mainframe)

DELETE     deletes portions of a string; the parameters are the same as with
           SUBSTR. DELETE works the same as its Pascal/VS counterpart

DIGITSOF   returns the number of digits of a decimal variable (from the definition)

DISPOSE    legacy Pascal function, but has no effect in this implementation (!)

EOF           ' , 25 , FUNC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc
EOL           ' , 28 , FUNC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc
EOLN          ' , 26 , FUNC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc
EOT           ' , 29 , FUNC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc
EXIT          ' , 15 , PROC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc
EXP           ' ,'DEXP' ) ,     // math function of the Fortran lib
EXPO          ' , 39 , FUNC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc
FILEFCB       ' , 70 , FUNC ,'$PASMEM' , 7 , 1 ,'A' , 0 ) ,
FLOOR         ' , 47 , FUNC ) ,    // floor function
FREE          ' , 63 , PROC ,'$PASMEM' , 3 , 1 ,'P' , 0 ) ,
FREEX         ' , 64 , PROC ,'$PASMEM' , 4 , 1 ,'P' , 0 ) ,
GET           ' , 1 , PROC ) ,    // legacy Pascal standard proc

INDEX      INDEX (s1, s2) returns the index of the first occurence of s2 in s1;
           zero if not found. Same as in Pascal/VS and PL/1.

LASTINDEX  LASTINDEX (s1, s2) returns the index of the last occurence of s2 in s1;
           zero if not found.

LEFT       string function. Same as SUBSTR starting from position 1.

LENGTH     gets the current length of a string variable

LINELIMIT  legacy Pascal standard proc; not sure, what this function does ...

LN         logarithm function (Fortran library on the mainframe)

LTRIM      trims spaces on the left (like in Pascal/VS)

MARK       legacy Pascal standard proc to save the current heap pointer,
           see RELEASE (MARK and RELEASE should not be used with new programs,
           but they are still used in the compiler; use ALLOC and FREE with
           new programs)

MAXLENGTH  gets the maximum length of a string variable

MEMCMP     block compare like memcmp in C

MEMCPY     block move (copy) like memcpy in C

MEMSET     initialize a block with a byte pattern (like memset in C)

MESSAGE    on the mainframe: WTO (write to operator);
           on other platforms: write to stderr

NEW        legacy Pascal standard proc to allocate storage on the (old) heap;
           such storage can only be freed by using MARK and RELEASE.
           It is recommended to use ALLOC and FREE with new programs
           instead of NEW.

ODD        legacy Pascal standard proc, returns TRUE, if the argument is odd,
           and FALSE otherwise

ORD        legacy Pascal standard proc; converts char to integer

PACK       legacy Pascal standard proc - only for compatibility reasons,
           not needed

PAGE       legacy Pascal standard proc; writes a new page on an output file

PRECISIONOF   returns the precision of a decimal variable (from the definition);
              that is, the number of digits after the decimal point

PRED       legacy Pascal standard proc; returns the predecessor of the argument
           (with scalar and simple types)

PTR2INT    new function; converts pointers to integers

PTRADD     new function; adds an integer value to a pointer

PTRCAST    new function; PTRCAST can be used to assign pointers of different types

PTRDIFF    new function; PTRDIFF returns the difference of two pointers as an
           integer value

PUT        legacy Pascal standard proc; used to transfer a file component to a file
           (usually not used for TEXT files, but for binary files, that is:
           FILES of RECORDs).

READ       legacy Pascal standard proc; used to read different types from a
           TEXT file. New Stanford Pascal has several extensions; it is
           possible to read scalar types, for example. And: READ supports
           length specifications, like with Pascal/VS. For example:
              READ (I:4, CH, J:5);
           only 4 characters are read for the integer value I, then one
           character CH, then 5 characters for J etc.

READLN     legacy Pascal standard proc; used to ignore the rest of the current
           line and start reading at the beginning of the next line

READSTR    new function, same as in Pascal/VS. The first parameter is a
           string variable. The variables are read from the string variable
           and not from an input file.
           Example:
              S := '0007X   12';
              READSTR (S, I:4, CH, J:5);
           This will set I to 7, CH to 'X' and J to 12.

RELEASE    legacy Pascal standard proc to reset the heap pointer
           this way returning all storage since the last MARK call
           to the Pascal runtime (should not be used with new programs;
           use ALLOC and FREE instead).

REPEATSTR  REPEATSTR (s, n) returns the string s repeated n times. This
           function is implemented using a new P-Code instruction, and it
           is used inside string functions to build new strings, containing of
           n blanks (for example)

RESET      legacy Pascal standard proc; this procedure opens a file for input
           and resets the file pointer to the beginning of the file

RESULTP    is a function returning a pointer (ANYPTR) to the function result
           (usable in every function)

REWRITE    legacy Pascal standard proc; this procedure opens a file for output
           and resets the file pointer to the beginning of the file.
           Old content of the file is lost

RIGHT      string function. Similar to SUBSTR at the right part of the string.

ROUND      legacy Pascal standard proc; returns the argument (floating point)
           rounded as integer value. Caution: if the FP argument is the result
           of a computation, you may not get the expected result due to
           precision problems.

ROUNDX     new function with two arguments. The first argument is a FP value,
           and the second tells the decimal place, where the rounding will
           take place. For example: roundx (123.4567, 2) = 123.46
           The result is a FP value again. The input FP value is "corrected"
           before the rounding takes place, so that precision problems
           (hopefully) will not occur.

RTRIM      trims spaces on the right (like TRIM in Pascal/VS)

SIN        sinus function (Fortran library on the mainframe)

SIZEOF     this (compile time) function returns the size of an object in bytes;
           it can by used for variables and for types (much the same as in C)

SKIP       legacy Pascal standard proc; writes line feeds on output files (maybe!)

SQR        legacy Pascal standard proc ... maybe square ?

SQRT       square root function (Fortran library on the mainframe)

STR        this function converts char arrays and single chars to strings

STRRESULT  is a function of type STRING which retrieves the current
           function result, when inside a string function

STRRESULTP is a function of type pointer to CHAR, which points to the
           content of the current function result, when inside a string function

SUBSTR     SUBSTR (s, n, m) or SUBSTR (s, n) - gets the Substring from s
           starting at position n with length m (first format) or the rest of the
           string (2nd format); same as in Pascal/VS and PL/1

SUCC       legacy Pascal standard proc; returns the successor of the argument
           (with scalar and simple types)

TRACE      legacy Pascal standard proc; not sure, what this function does ...

TRANSLATE  TRANSLATE (s1, to, from) translates s1 controlled by one or two
           translate tables (see PL/1)

TRAP       legacy Pascal standard proc; not sure, what this function does ...

TRIM       trims spaces on both sides (different from TRIM in Pascal/VS !!)

TRUNC      legacy Pascal standard proc; returns the argument (floating point)
           truncated to the next lower integer value.

UNPACK     legacy Pascal standard proc - only for compatibility reasons,
           not needed

VERIFY     VERIFY (s1, s2) returns the index of the first character in s1
           which is not in s2 (same as in PL/1)

WRITE      legacy Pascal standard proc; used to write different types to an
           output file. New Stanford Pascal has several extensions; it is
           possible to write scalar types and pointers, for example.

WRITELN    legacy Pascal standard proc; writes a new line on output files

WRITESTR   new function, same as in Pascal/VS. The first parameter is a
           string variable. The result of the WRITE goes to the string variable
           and not to a file. The same types and parameters are allowed as
           with "normal" WRITE; the string must be long enough to hold the result.

